A Ritual of Blessing and Empowerment for the Female Practice, from the Heart Essence of the
Vast Expanse
by Jigme Lingpa

The stages for the blessing and empowerment:
khandro duwé dü nyen la
On a momentous occasion when the ḍākinīs gather,
tsön kyil nyi sam tsombü teng
Upon one of the two types of coloured maṇḍala, or a heap,1
bhenda tsenden dütsi kang
Fill an authentic skull-cup with ambrosia
amrita dang nyerngé dren
And sprinkle it with amṛta and the twenty-five substances.
sindhuré chak melong la
On a mirror coated with sindūra
shek ma nga yi sabön dri
Draw the seed syllables of the five female buddhas;
tengdu dril ché ding gur pub
Place a bell on top and cover it with a canopy.
nyerchö tsoktor zang du sham
Elegantly arrange the regular offerings and feast-offering tormas.

lé shyung sang la depa ja
Carry out the practice of the main text and recite the mantra.
tsok pul rigpé metok dor
Offer a feast and cast the flower of awareness.
lobma tru shying gek dang tral
Cleanse the students and expel obstructive forces.

künkhyen yeshe pungpo chen
Omniscient one, embodiment of primordial wisdom,2
sipé khorlo nam jongwa
Who thoroughly purifies the wheel of existence—
dering shepé rinchen ter
Lord, with your kindness, grant me this precious treasure
tsowö dak la kadrin tsol
Of which you have spoken today.3
len sum jé dö logyü shé
Have the students repeat this three times, then relate the history.
tsemé shyi dang kyabsem bok
Transmit the four immeasurables, refuge and mind set upon awakening.

dené wang gi dönpo ni
Then, for the actual empowerment:
yeshe wab la nenten ja
Apply yourself to the invocation of the wisdom deities.
lobmé namshé ram yik lé
The students’ consciousness transforms into a raṃ syllable,
mebar nammin pungpo sek
From which there blazes a fire that burns the ripened aggregates.

ö kyi nampé tong zuk lé
Out of empty form, which has the character of light,
khandro dechen gyalmo ni
Arises the ḍākinī Queen of Great Bliss.
shyal chik chak nyi kudok mar
She has one face and two hands; her body is red in colour.
chermo nyampé dortab chen
She is naked, standing in the posture of equanimity, yet ready to act.
shintu chak dang shyepé shyal
Passionate and smiling,
chak yé töpé chang te’u
She holds in her right hand a small skull-drum,
nyen gyi tekar tö ching trol
Which she plays at the level of her ear.
yönpa driguk yuwa ni
In her left hand she holds a hooked knife, the handle
ku la ten né chok du gying
Resting on her hip; her bearing is imposing and graceful.
bhaga gyé shing numa bur
Her bhaga is expanded and her breasts swell.
rinpoché dang shyönnü gyen
She is adorned with jewels and youthful ornaments
pundariké doshal chang
And wears a garland of white lotus flowers.
rüpé gyen druk ku la dzé
The six bone ornaments adorn her body,
nak num utré lentsar chen
Her black, glistening hair is plaited,
rinpoché yi tsé dren ji
And her jewelled diadem shines majestically.
umé chen ni ying la zik
Her central eye gazes into all-encompassing space.
longkü chen gyi drowa dul
Her sambhogakāya eye tames beings.
tulkü chen gyi kham sum guk
Her nirmāṇakāya eye summons the three realms.

ku la gyüdé kyilkhor dzok
In her body the maṇḍalas of all the classes of tantra are perfectly complete.
bumtrak yangpé khandrö kor
She is surrounded by a vast assembly of hundreds of thousands of ḍākinīs.
tukkar arya taré ma
In her heart is Lady Ārya Tārā,
jangngön shyal chik chak nyi tsul
Blue-green in colour, with one face and two hands.
dé yi tukkar yeshe kyi
In her heart is the wisdom deity Vārāhī;
pakmo nak num dri töchen
Shiny black in colour and holding a hooked knife and skull-cup.
sempa sum tsek né nga ru
There are the three nested beings4 and your five places
chaktsen nga dang sabön ngé
Are marked by the five implements and the five seed syllables.
tsenpa dé lé ö tröpé
From them, light radiates out
womin né dang khachö shying
To The Unsurpassed,5 the celestial realms,
yu lo kö dang pema ö
The Land of Turquoise Leaves and the Realm of Lotus Light,
rangshyin né né yeshepa
Inviting the wisdom deities from their homes.
drang té nyisumepar tim
They dissolve into you, becoming inseparable.

hung, yul gyi ming ni gyagar yul
Hūṃ! In the country known as India
né kyi chokgyur orgyen né
Lies the supreme sacred land of Uḍḍiyāna,
dhumatala khandrö drong
As well as Dhumathala, its citadel of ḍākinīs,
ling gi ling chok ngayab ling
And also Cāmaradvīpa, supreme isle of isles.
dön la womin dechen shying
In reality they are the Unsurpassed, the pure realm of great bliss,
nampa khachö trulpé né
Yet they appear as emanated celestial realms.
gyé shing shyukpé yul kün né
From all those places where you joyfully reside,
chöku yumchen tsogyalma
Great dharmakāya mother Tsogyal,
bumtrak khandrö khor dang ché
Together with your retinue of hundreds of thousands of ḍākinīs,
jingyi lab chir shek su sol
Come! Inspire me with your blessings—
né chok diru jinpob la
Shower down your blessings on this supreme place!
drub chok dak la wang shyi kur
Grant me, a supreme practitioner, the four empowerments!
gek dang lokdren barché sol
Dispel obstructing forces, corrupting influences and hindrances!
chok dang tünmong ngödrub tsol
Grant me the supreme and ordinary accomplishments!
om pemo yogini taré tuttaré turé jnana warahi pem pem
oṃ padmo-yoginī tāre tuttāre ture jñāna-vārāhī pheṃ pheṃ
Light incense and invoke the blessings.
Stabilize it with:
tishta benza
tiṣṭha vajra
Place the bliss-sustaining6 vase on the students’ heads.

ho, sang ngak damtsik laname
Hoḥ. The unsurpassable samayas of Secret Mantra
rangjung lhündrub bumpé wang
Of the naturally arisen, spontaneously present vase empowerment,
sangye kün gyi sang sum gyi
The sacred empowerment of the three secrets of all the buddhas—
wangkur dampa khyö la jin
I bestow upon you!
om pemo yogini taré tuttaré turé jnana warahi kalasha abhikintsa hung
oṃ padmo-yoginī tāre tuttāre ture jñāna-vārāhī kalaśābhiṣiñca hūṃ
Touch their heads and offer a single mouthful.

Place it at their throats and have them taste it with their tongue.
ho, changchub sem kyi damtsik ni
Hoḥ. The samaya of bodhicitta
tsa kham yigé khorlor tim
Dissolves into the circle of syllables in the channels and elements.
jöpamé lé tamché kye
Everything arises from the inexpressible state.
drak tong sung gi wang tob shok
May you obtain the speech empowerment of sound-emptiness.
Recite the root mantra supplemented with:
bodhitsitta abhikintsa hum
bodhicittābhiṣiñca hūṃ
Hold the counting mālā and have the students repeat the mantra.

Apply the sindūra maṇḍala and say:
ho, yeshe nampa tamchepa
Hoḥ. The primordial wisdom in which all qualities are complete
gawa shyi la yangdak ten
Depends entirely on the four joys.
tabshé drelwé damtsik gi
The samaya in which skilful means and insight are united,
chakgya chenpo khyö kyi long
The great mudrā—you should enjoy.
dza hung bam ho
jaḥ hūṃ baṃ hoḥ
a ho maha sukha
a ho mahāsukhaḥ
Sindūra is applied to the hearts of the students.

Ring the bell. Both master and students
Focus their awareness on its sound.
ho, dra ni drakpa nyi né tong
Hoḥ. Sound is audible, yet empty.
deshyin sem la ngowo mé
Likewise, mind is devoid of essence.
ngowo mepé neluk la
In the essenceless natural state
taja pang né yangdak tö
Abandon the ‘looked at’ and perfectly look.
Recite:
a a
a a
This is the absolute introduction.

wang shyi dzokpé damtsik tu
As samaya commitments for having received the four empowerments,
dorjé lobpön mi pang shying
I pledge never to abandon the vajra master,
mar ngö tsé chu gyün mi ché
To observe continually the twenty-fifth day of the lunar calendar,7
shyönnuma la nyenkur ja
To honour and respect young women,
taktu changchub sem nyi gom
And always to cultivate twofold bodhicitta.

tsowö jitar ka tsalpa
Whatever the guru, chief of the maṇḍala, commands,
dé dak tamché dak gi gyi
I shall carry out—each and every instruction.
Dedicate the merit to complete awakening.
Samaya.
With this single ritual, the blessing (of the Yoginī),8
Authorization (of Tārā), and empowerment (of Vārāhī) are complete.
Do not allow the samaya to deteriorate.
To transmit this to anybody other than
A practitioner will bring about retaliation.

Samaya. Seal, seal, seal. The signs are sealed. The treasure is sealed. Hidden seal. Profound
seal.

| Translated by Han Kop and reviewed and edited by Josh Capitanio, Aaron Coote and Adam Pearcey,
2021, for the Longchen Nyingtik Project.
↑ It is possible to use a coloured sand maṇḍala, a painted maṇḍala or heaps of grains.↑ Literally,
‘possessing the aggregates of primordial wisdom’.↑ This verse seems to be from the
tantra The Beginning Chapter of the Supremely Great Vajra (rdo rje dpal mchog chen po brtag
pa dang p, Toh 453).↑ The three nested beings are the commitment being (Skt. samayasattva),
the wisdom being (Skt. jñānasattva) and the meditation being (Skt. Samādhisattva).↑ Skt.
Akaniṣṭha↑ Bliss-sustaining (bde skyong) is a synonym for kapāla, which likely derives
from a Sanskrit etymology of the word.↑ Literally, the tenth day of the waning moon; it is
commonly referred to as ‘ḍākinī day’.↑ i.e., Vajrayoginī.