Illuminating the Meaning of Empowerment
A Self-Initiation for the Female Practice of the Ḍākinī
by Jigme Lingpa

The gateway to complete liberation—
The interdependent origination of reality devoid of inherent existence—
Is the space of the Vajra Queen.
Remembering that it is complete with the supreme of all qualities, delight in it!
The self-initiation for the Female Awareness Holder has three main parts.
1. The Preliminaries
If the area has not been tamed, begin by carrying out an earth-ritual. It is best to have a
consecrated maṇḍala of coloured sand or a maṇḍala painted on cloth; if you have neither, place
heaps [of grain] upon an altar. Upon that place a skull-cup filled with ambrosia1 and
sprinkle it with Dharma medicine and the twenty-five vase substances.
On top, place a mirror coated with sindūra, on which is drawn a crossed dharmodaya. In its centre
is a red coil of joy with four parts, on top of which is a tāṃ syllable, surrounded
by four coils of joy which have the colours of their respective direction, and—clockwise,
starting from the front—the syllables ha, ri, ni, and sa, with the heads of the syllables
turned outwards. On top of that place a bell covered with a canopy of red cloth. Set medicine,
torma, rakta and the regular offerings around it. Nearby place an activity vase filled
with scented water.
2. The Main Part
There are two parts.
1. Consecrating the Maṇḍala
If you can clearly visualize ordinary appearances as the maṇḍala of the ḍākinī it is fine if
you do not separate the self and the front visualization, since by merely casting the flower
of awareness the meaning of 'entering the maṇḍala' is already perfectly accomplished.
However if you do not have that capacity, then, and for the self-initiation in particular, you
need to add ‘phaṭ jaḥ’ to the root mantra at the end of the praise. When you recite this,
the self and front visualization separate. Then carry out the palanquin recitation.
Likewise, visualize the outside of the vase of the naturally arisen kapāla2 as the palace and
its contents as having the nature of the deities. Bring this to mind with absolute certainty.
At the end of the vase recitation carry out the offerings and praise and offer the water
of the conch [to the deities of the vase, after which the deities] melt into light.
Visualize Hayagrīva in the activity vase. He is holding a skull-mace in one hand and his other
hand displays the threatening mudrā.
om benza kroda hayagriva hulu hulu hung pé
oṃ vajra krodha hayagrīva hulu hulu hūṃ phaṭ
Recite this however much you can. Then present the offering water with:
om ah hung
oṃ āḥ hūṃ
[And the deities] melt into light.
2. The Self-Initiation
This has eight parts.
1. [The Cleansing]
jitar tampa tsam gyi ni
Just as the gods cleansed your body
lha nam kyi ni trü sol tar
Moments after you took birth,
lha yi chu ni dakpa yi
With the purest water of the gods,
deshyin dak gi wang kur ro
Likewise I now bestow empowerment.
om sarwa tathagata abhishekaté samaya shriyé hung
oṃ sarva tathāgata abhiṣekate samaya śrīye hūṃ
With this, carry out the purification, after which [your impurities] are removed.
Give the torma to the outsiders3 and meditate on the protection circle.
Put on the blindfold with:
om tsakshu bhenda varamanaya hung
oṃ cakṣu bhandha vāra maṇāya hūṃ
Hold the flower with:
ah kham wira hung
aḥ khaṃ vīra hūṃ4
Then they offer a maṇḍala.
2. The Request
künkhyen yeshe pungpo chan
Omniscient one, embodiment of primordial wisdom,5
sipé khorlo nam jongwe
Who thoroughly purifies the wheel of existence––
dering shepé rinchen ter
Lord, with your kindness, grant me this precious treasure
tsowö dak la kadrin tsol
Of which you have spoken today.6
Three times.
3. Gathering the Accumulations
dorjé lobpön sangye pal
I prostrate to the vajra master,
dü sum shyuk la chaktsal lo
Glorious embodiment of the buddhas of past, present and future!

chok sum tenpé shying gyur la
With a mind free from all duality,
nyimé yi kyi kyab su chi
I take refuge in the Three Jewels, the objects of reliance!

ngöjor yi kyi namtrulpé
I request that you accept these pure offerings,
dakpé chöpa shyé su sol
Both actual and envisioned.

ngödrub chuwo chöpé gek
My faults, the hindrances that cut the flow of siddhis,
nyejé malü shakpar gyi
I confess without exception.

chok chu khor sum dakpé chö
In all those actions throughout the ten directions, done without attachment,
machak chö la jé yirang
And free from concepts of subject, object and action, I rejoice!

dakpé ta shyi drimamé
I awaken the perfect bodhicitta,
dzokpé changchub semkyé do
Pure, untainted by the four extremes.7

deshek wangchuk semchen la
To the sugatas, mighty lords and sentient beings8
göpa sum chir lü bul lo
I offer my body for the threefold purpose.9

tserab drangpé gewa nam
Gathering the merits accumulated throughout all my lives,
dü né changchub chok tu ngo
I dedicate them to supreme enlightenment!
Three times.
4. Taking the Vows
dewar shekpa khyé chindra
Bliss Gone One,10 whatever you are like,
dendra khonar dak gyur shok
May I become exactly the same,
chöpa mejung samyé pa
And carry out wondrous, inconceivable actions
dro la pen chir dak gi ché
In order to bring benefit to beings.
changchub sem chok dampa dang
The vows of the supreme mind set upon awakening
ku sung tuk kyi chakgya ni
And the mudrās of body, speech and mind,
sok gi chir yang mi tong na
Even at the cost of my own life, I shall not forsake.
dorjé gyalpö jin lab dzö
Vajra king, inspire me with your blessings.
Three times.
4. Entering the Maṇḍala
dené rigpa deshek nyingpö ngowo nyi lobpön gyi chak la jü né tsok gyé loburwé ten tiklé nyakchik
pé gor tripar mö shik
Imagine that the master leads, with his hands, your eight adventitious consciousnesses to the
sole entrance of the single sphere,11 awareness, the essence of your buddha nature.
a kham bira hung
aḥ khaṃ bīra hūṃ
Recite the following three times, paying homage to the awakened body, speech and mind:
om nama té hung
oṃ nama te hūṃ
om nama mé hung
oṃ nama mi hūṃ
om nama nama hung
oṃ namo nama hūṃ
5. Taking Birth as Their Heir
jetsün dorjé naljormé dündu wang tek pema dab gyé la rangnyi khöpé tsowo dang rikdak gi tukka
né ram yik marpo dewé daknyi chen du jungwé künshyi tsok gyé dang chepé nammin gyi pungpo
jang
Imagine that you place yourself in front of the venerable Vajrayoginī upon an empowerment platform
in the form of a lotus with eight petals. From the heart of the main deity and the
Lord of the Families arises a red raṃ syllable, the nature of bliss, which purifies the ripened
aggregates, including the eight consciousnesses such as the all-ground consciousness.
nampar shepa tam yik tu gyurpa rikdak gi shyal du drong | kü yib gyü | yum gyi kha sang du lhung
Your consciousness transforms into a tāṃ syllable. It enters the mouth of the Lord of the Families,
flowing down the shape of his body, and falls into the secret space of the consort.
shyudé dang nyisumepé changchub kyi sem su gyurpa ngar gyi wang tek la khöpar gyur
It transforms into bodhicitta, indivisible from the melting bliss, that is then placed upon
the empowerment platform mentioned before.
6. Descent of Wisdom
ö kyi nampé tong zuk lé
Out of empty form, which has the character of light,
khandro dechen gyalmo ni
Arises the ḍākinī Queen of Great Bliss.
shyal chik chak nyi kudok mar
She has one face and two hands; her body is red in colour.
chermo nyampé dortab chen
She is naked, standing in the posture of equanimity, yet ready to act.
shintu chak dang shyepé shyal
Passionate and smiling,
chak yé töpé chang te’u
In her right hand she holds a small skull-drum
nyen gyi tekar tö ching trol
That is raised and played close to her ear.
yönpa driguk yuwa ni
In her left hand she holds a hooked knife, the handle
ku la ten né chok du gying
Resting on her hip; her bearing is imposing and graceful.
bhaga gyé shing numa bur
Her bhaga is expanded and her breasts swell.
rinpoché dang shyönnü gyen
She is adorned with jewels and youthful ornaments
pundariké doshal chang
And wears a garland of white lotus flowers.
rüpé gyen druk ku la dzé
The six bone ornaments adorn her body,
nak num utré lentsar chen
Her black, glistening hair is plaited,
rinpoché yi tsé dren ji
And her jewelled diadem shines majestically.
umé chen ni ying la zik
Her central eye gazes into all-encompassing space.
longkü chen gyi drowa dul
Her sambhogakāya eye tames beings.
tulkü chen gyi kham sum guk
Her nirmāṇakāya eye summons the three realms.

ku la gyüdé kyilkhor dzok
In her body the maṇḍalas of all the classes of tantra are perfectly complete. 12
tukkar arya taré ma
In her heart is Lady Ārya Tārā,
jangngön shyal chik chak nyi tsul
Blue-green in colour, with one face and two hands.
dé yi tukkar yeshe kyi
In her heart is the wisdom deity Vārāhī,
pakmo nak num dri töchen
Shiny black in colour and holding a hooked knife and skull-cup.
sempa sum tsek né nga ru
These are the three nested beings13; your five places
chaktsen nga dang sabön ngé
Are marked by the five implements and the five seed syllables.
tsenpa dé lé ö tröpé
From them, light radiates out
womin né dang khachö shying
To The Unsurpassed,14 the celestial realms,
yu lo kö dang pema ö
The Land of Turquoise Leaves and the Realm of Lotus Light,
rangshyin né né yeshepa
Inviting the wisdom deities from their homes.
drang té nyisumepar tim
They dissolve into you, becoming inseparable.

hum, yul gyi ming ni gyagar yul
Hūṃ! In the country known as India
né kyi chokgyur orgyen ne
Lies the supreme sacred land of Uḍḍiyāna,
dhumatala khandrö drong
As well as Dhumathala, its citadel of ḍākinīs,
ling gi ling chok ngayab ling
And also Cāmaradvīpa, supreme isle of isles.
dön la womin dechen shying
In reality they are the Unsurpassed, the pure realm of great bliss,
nampa khachö trulpé ne
Yet they appear as emanated celestial realms.
gyé shing shyukpé yul kün ne
From all those places where you joyfully reside,
chöku yumchen tsogyalma
Great dharmakāya mother Tsogyal,
bumtrak khandrö khor dang che
Together with your retinue of hundreds of thousands of ḍākinīs,
jingyi lab chir shek su sol
Come! Inspire me with your blessings––
né chok diru jinpob la
Shower down your blessings on this supreme place!
drub chok dak la wang shyi kur
Grant me, a supreme practitioner, the four empowerments!
gek dang lokdren barché sol
Dispel obstructing forces, corrupting influences and hindrances!
chok dang tünmong ngödrub tsol
Grant me the supreme and ordinary accomplishments!
om pemo yogini taré tuttaré turé jnana varahi pem pem
oṃ padmo-yoginī tāre tuttāre ture jñāna-vārāhī pheṃ pheṃ
Light incense and invoke the wisdom until your body quivers and trembles. After that stabilize
it with:
tishta benza
tiṣṭha vajra
Cast the flower of awareness with:
pratitsa benza ho
pratīccha vajra hoḥ
Place the flower on your head and imagine that the superior deity dissolves into you:
prati ghrihana imam sato maha bala
prati gṛhaṇa imam satva mahābala
Imagine that you see what is shown to you by the teacher:15
tsakshu prabeshaya pé
cakṣu praveśaya phaṭ
7. The Prayer
changchub dorjé sangye la
As the Vajra of Enlightenment bestowed
chö chen jitar tsalwa tar
The supreme worship on the Buddhas,
dak kyang yongsu kyobpé chir
Bestow it now upon me,
namkhé dorjé deng dak tsol
O Vajra Space, for my salvation.16
8. The Actual Bestowing of the Empowerment
There are four parts.
1. The Vase Empowerment
Touch your head with the skull-vase and say:
ho, sang ngak damtsik lana me
Hoḥ. The unsurpassable samayas of Secret Mantra
rangjung lhündrub bumpé wang
Of the naturally arisen, spontaneously present vase empowerment,
sangye kün gyi sang sum gyi
The sacred empowerment of the three secrets of all the buddhas—
wangkur dampa khyö la jin
I bestow upon you!
om pemo yogini taré tuttaré turé jnana varahi kalasha abhikintsa hum
oṃ padmo-yoginī tāre tuttāre ture jñāna-vārāhī kalaśābhiṣiñca hūṃ
Taste the water of the vase.
2. The Secret Empowerment
dütsi denyi lama yabyum gyi changsem ngö su sam la yum gyi kha sang né langpar mö né hub gang
tung té
Imagine that this ambrosia is the actual bodhicitta of the master and his consort, and that
you receive it from the secret space of the consort. Drink it in a single gulp.
ho, changchub sem kyi damtsik ni
Hoḥ. The samaya of bodhicitta
tsa kham yigé khorlor tim
Dissolves into the circle of syllables in the channels and elements.
jöpamé lé tamché kye
Everything arises from the inexpressible state.
drak tong sung gi wang tob shog
May you obtain the speech empowerment of sound-emptiness.
Recite the root mantra supplemented with:
bodhitsitta abhikintsa a
bodhicittābhiṣiñca āh17
In connection with this, hold the counting mālā and say:
dünkyé kyi tukka né ngak treng jung
The mantra garland arises from the heart of the front visualization
dak kyé kyi shyal du shyuk
And enters into the mouth of the self-visualization.
tukké sabön la khorwar gyur
It revolves around the syllable at my heart.
Recite the root mantra three times.
chomden dak gi zung lak kyi
Blessed One, I will follow you.
dak la nyewar dzé du sol
Please take care of me.
Recite this three times. At the end, place your mālā on your head and say:
chomden di la tsal lak kyi
Blessed One, bestow the empowerment
di la gowar dzé du sol
And your command upon me.
ngak kyi ngödrub tsal né kyang
Bestow the accomplishment of Secret Mantra
tulshyuk tenpar dzé du sol shyé jö
And make my yogic conduct stable.
3. The Insight-Wisdom Empowerment
gawa shyi daknyi sindhuré ten drilbü tenpa dang chepa lang la tabshé drelwé tarpa tenpa mö la
Hold the support—sindūra, the embodiment of the four joys—and the supported—the bell—in your
hands. Imagine that these are the supports that show liberation, where skilful means and
insight are united.
ho, yeshe nampa tamchepa
Hoḥ. The primordial wisdom in which all qualities are complete
gawa shyi la yangdak ten
Depends entirely on the four joys.
tabshé drelwé damtsik gi
The samaya in which skilful means and insight are united,
chakgya chenpo khyö kyi long
The great mudrā, you should enjoy.
dza hung bam ho
jaḥ hūṃ baṃ hoḥ
shyepé rolpa chenpö damtsik dang
This is the samaya of great enjoyment.
a ho maha sukha dewé tab jepé lhenkyé la ngepa tenpar gyur
Think that with 'a ho mahāsukhaḥ' bliss is used as the skilful means through which the innate
bliss is stabilized definitively.
Apply sindūra at your heart.
4. The Absolute Empowerment
drilbu trol shying dé dra la rigpa té né
Focus your awareness on the sound of the bell ringing
tab lé jungwé pé yeshe kyi kyang mi tsönpé chönyi la nyampar shyak né
And rest in the nature of reality, which cannot be illustrated even by the example wisdom that
arises on the basis of skilful means.
ho, dra ni drakpa nyi né tong
Hoḥ. Sound is audible, yet empty.
deshyin sem la ngowo me
Likewise, mind is devoid of essence.
ngowo mepé neluk la
In the essenceless natural state
taja pang né yangdak to
Abandon the ‘looked at’ and perfectly look.
a ah
a aḥ
Look at the meaning of non-arising.
I have arranged the objects of purification and the result of purification of each of the four
empowerments in this way. Yet it is also permissible to follow the wording of the guru
yoga. What is important is that you arouse confidence in the meaning.
3. The Concluding Stages
There is a general and a specific promise to uphold the samayas.
1. The General
wang shyi dzokpé damtsik tu
As samaya commitments for having received the four empowerments,
dorjé lobpön mi pang shying
I pledge never to abandon the vajra master,
mar ngö tsé chu gyün mi che
To observe continually the twenty-fifth day of the lunar calendar,18
shyönnuma la nyenkur ja
To honour and respect young women,
taktu changchub sem nyi gom
And always to cultivate twofold bodhicitta.
Three times.
2. The Specific
tsowö jitar ka tsalpa
Whatever the guru, chief of the maṇḍala, commands,
dedak tamché dak gi gyi
I shall carry out—each and every instruction.
khyö la dak kyang yongsu bul
I offer myself entirely to you.
lobmar zung né ché du sol
Accept me as your student and I will follow your words in detail.
Recite this verse three times. Then, turn the wheel of the feast-gathering and carry out the
concluding rituals such as the dedication and the aspiration prayers as usual.
Through this practice all impairments and breakages will be purified and blessings will enter
your being, and so it is good to receive the self-initiation again and again.

This was written by Rigdzin Jigme Lingpa at the request of Damtsik Dorje, a monk and master
from Samye.

| Translated by Han Kop and reviewed by Josh Capitanio, for the Longchen Nyingtik Project, 2021.
With thanks to Tulku Dawa and Khenpo Sonam Tsewang for their clarifications.

Source: 'jigs med gling pa mkhyen brtse 'od zer. "yum ka mkha' 'gro'i bdag 'jug dbang don rab
gsal." In gsung 'bum/_'jigs med gling pa/ sde dge par ma. TBRC W27300. 7: 257 - 264. Gangtok,
Sikkim: Pma Thinley for Dodrupchen Rinpoche, 1985.
↑ Skt. amṛta↑ Tib. bde skyong. Literally, a ‘bliss-sustainer’, a synonym that probably derives
from a Sanskrit etymology of the word kapāla.↑ Khenpo Sonam Tsewang explains that outsiders
here refers to all those spirits who are excluded from the maṇḍala.↑ The full form of
this and the preceding mantra appear in Kongtrul’s empowerment manual Yum bka' bde chen rgyal
mo'i dbang gi chog sgrig bde chen bcud 'beb↑ Literally, ‘possessing the aggregates of
primordial wisdom’.↑ This verse seems to be from the tantra The Beginning Chapter of the
Supremely Great Vajra (rdo rje dpal mchog chen po brtag pa dang po, Toh 453).↑ Jigme Lingpa
explains these as the four extremes of existence and non-existence, eternalism and annihilationism.↑
Jigme Lingpa explains that the sugatas referred to here are the buddhas of the
past; the mighty lords are the gurus, the buddhas of the present; and sentient beings are
the buddhas of the future, since they all possess the buddha-nature or sugatagarbha.↑ As
Jigme Lingpa explains, one offers to the buddhas of the past in order to bring about the
actualization of their inexhaustible qualities of the body, speech, mind, qualities and activities;
one offers to the buddhas of the present in order to become a suitable vessel for
the perfect wisdom of all the tathāgatas and to attain fruition through their empowerment
and blessings; and one offers to the buddhas of the future in order to create the auspicious
circumstances for attaining the fruition of the great vehicle and fully perfecting the
benefit of others.↑ Skt. Sugata.↑ Tib. Tikle nyakchik (thig le nyag gcig).↑ In the empowerment
manual by Jamgön Kongtrul, the empowerment treasure text, and the daily Yumka practice
by the Third Dodrupchen, this line is followed by the line “She is surrounded by a vast
assembly of hundreds of thousands of ḍākinīs”, but this line is not found in any edition
of the self-initiation.↑ The three nested beings are the commitment being (Skt. samayasattva),
the wisdom being (Skt. jñānasattva) and the meditation being (Skt. Samādhisattva).↑
Skt. Akaniṣṭha↑ Khenpo Sonam Tsewang says that this line is perhaps better read as བསྟན་པ་མཐོང་བར་བསམ་,
and so we have translated it as such.↑ This verse is from the Guhyasamāja Tantra,
Chapter 16, verse 41. I have followed the translation of Fremantle, Francesca, ''A Critical
Study of the Guhyasamāja Tantra'', Ph.D. dissertation, University of London (1971).
See page 115 for the English and page 359 for the critical edition of this verse. All editions
of our text had rdo rjes, which I have amended to rdo rje, following the tantra. The
Sanskrit is as follows: bodhivajreṇa buddhānāṃ yathā datto mahāmahaḥ / mamāpi trāṇanārthāya
khavajrādya dadāhi me /.↑ Kongtrul’s empowerment manual and the treasure text have hūṃ
here.↑ Literally, the tenth day of the waning moon; it is commonly referred to as ‘ḍākinī
day’.