The Root Empowerment of the Vase Conferring Majesty
The Inner Enabling Empowerment of the Heart-Essence of the Vast Expanse
by Jigme Lingpa

rangrig dön gyi lha la dü
Homage to the ultimate deity of natural awareness!
sang chen dorjé tekpa ni
The gateway to the Vajra Vehicle of the Great Secret
jukgo wang la damtsik sok
Is empowerment; its life-force is the samaya.
rangshyin neluk jödral té
The natural state is ineffable.
dechir kalpa chokden gyi
Therefore, in order to take care
lobma jesu zungwé chir
Of extremely fortunate disciples,
tsa wanggyal tab chiluk ten samaya
Here I will reveal the Root Empowerment Conferring Majesty. Samaya!

wen shying nyamgé né chok tu
In an excellent sacred place, isolated and joyful,
kyilkhor cha shyi lekpar drik
Commence the preparations for the maṇḍala.
ü su ratné bumpa la
In the centre, place a jewelled vase,
kha gyen gul ching chü kyi tam
Ornamented and with a ribbon around its neck, and fill it with liquid.
yé su rangshyung poti dang
On the right, place a text of this practice.
yön du sang dzé bhandza gö
On the left, place a skull-cup filled with the secret substances.
tengdu melong sindhur ché
Upon it arrange a mirror coated with sindūra.
dorjé sempé melong dang
Cover the Vajrasattva mirror1
rik tsak nam la ding gur pub
And the empowerment image of the consort2 with a canopy.
gektré rigdzin düpa yi
Expel the obstructive forces and carry out the main practice
lé shyung sang shying nüden drub
Of The Vidyādhara Assembly according to your capacity.
ting ngé dzin gyi dakjuk lang
With samādhi, receive the self-initiation.

dené lobma dral la khö
Then the students take their seats in rows.
lé bum chü trü gek né yung
With water from the activity vase, perform the ablution and expel the obstructive forces.
sungkhor gom shying logyü shé
Meditate on the protective circle and relate the history.
mandal bul shying solwa dab
[The students] offer a maṇḍala and make the request.

ho, dak ni kalden rik kyi bu
Hoḥ. Please take care of me, a fortunate child of Noble Family,
tukjé chenpö jezung la
And look upon me with your great compassion.
damtsik chenpö kyilkhor du
Allow me to enter this maṇḍala of the great samaya
juk ching minpar dzé du sol
And bring me to maturity!
Recite this and have the students repeat it three times. Then proclaim the following:
ho, sangwa chok gi kyilkhor dir
Hoḥ. This maṇḍala of the supreme secret
jukpar ka la khenyen che
Is difficult to enter and the stakes are high:
damtsik nyam na lak gyurwe
Impairing the samaya will bring destruction;
dam sung wangkur jinpar ja
So, maintain the samaya and I’ll grant you empowerment.
Transmit the verses for taking refuge and the mind set upon awakening.
Gather the accumulations with the seven branches.
With this, the foundation for the empowerment is established.
Then the students generate themselves as the deity.
Apply yourself to the invocation of the wisdom deities
And seal them with:
tishta benzé
tiṣṭha vajra

Place the vase on the students heads’ and grant the empowerment:
hum, tashi bumpa lhé shyalye
Hūṃ. In the divine palace of the auspicious vase
lha dang nyimé dütsi chu
Is the amṛta water indivisible from the deities,
kalden bu la wangkurwe
Through which you, fortunate child, are empowered.
nang shyen lha kü chakgyardzog
May clinging to appearances be perfected as the mudrā of the deities' form,
nammin rigdzin nyertob ching
So that you attain the level of a matured vidyādhara
küntu ö kyi sa nön shog
And reach the stage of universal radiance.
Say the root mantra, adding:
kaya abhishintsa om
kayābhiṣiñca oṃ

Place the skull-cup filled with the secret substances at their throat.
hum, yabyum jorwé changchub sem
Hūṃ. Red and white bodhicitta flows from the point of union
kar mar bendhé nang du kyil
Of the male deity and consort, and fills the skull-cup.
kalden bu la wangkurwe
With it, fortunate child, you are empowered.
tsa kham yigé nampar min
May your channels and elements be matured into syllables,
tsé la wangwé rigdzin tob
So that you attain the level of a vidyādhara with power over life
pema chen gyi sa nön shog
And reach the stage of the lotus of non-attachment.
Say the root mantra, adding:
waka abhikintsa ah
vākābhiṣiñca āḥ

Place the [image of the] authentic consort in their hands.
hum, chö nam kün gyi jungné te
Hūṃ. The source of all phenomena
dewa chenpo sangwé yum
Is the secret mother-consort of great bliss.
rik kyi bu la jinpa yi
By presenting her to you, fortunate child,
ga shyi yeshe ngön du gyur
May you actualize the wisdom of the four joys,
chakgya chenpö rigdzin tob
So that you attain the level of a mahāmudrā vidyādhara
khorlo tsokchen sa nön shog
And reach the stage of Great Cloud Mass of Rotating Syllables!3
Say the root mantra, adding:
tsitta abhishindza hum
cittābhiṣiñca hūṃ

Reveal the mirror of Vajrasattva,
Upon a round, bronze mirror.
ho, kadak melong tsangmé ngog
Hoḥ. On the surface of the clear mirror of primordial purity
lhündrub dang shel drimé sal
The stainless crystal of spontaneous presence is reflected.
datak dzokpé wangkurwe
Through this empowerment in which symbolic indications are complete,
drimé rigpé neluk tog
May you realize the natural state of immaculate awareness,
lhündrub rigdzin nyertob ne
So that you attain the level of a spontaneously accomplished vidyādhara
dewa chenpö sa nön shog
And reach the stage of great bliss.
Say the root mantra, adding:
dharmadhatu abhikintsa hum
dharmadhātu-abhiṣiñca āḥ
Give the absolute introduction to the natural state.
Rest in a meditation free from any conceptual extremes.
Utter “phaṭ!” to separate mind and awareness.
Say “āḥ!” and grant the absolute introduction.
Then confer the entrustment with the scripture.
ho, chöku kuntuzangpo
Hoḥ. Dharmakāya Samantabhadra,
longku gyalwa rik nga
Saṃbhogakāya victorious ones of the five families,
tulku garab dorje
Nirmāṇakāya Garab Dorje,
lobpön jampal shenyen
Master Mañjuśrīmitra,
rigdzin shri singha
Vidyādhara Śrī Siṃha,
penchen bimalamitra
Great paṇḍita Vimalamitra,
orgyen pema tötreng
Skull-Garland Lotus4 of Uḍḍiyāna,
khandro yeshe tsogyal
Ḍākinī Yeshe Tsogyal,
ngadak trisong dé'u tsan
King Tri Songdetsen,
gyalsé drimé özer
Son of the victorious ones, Drime Özer,5
longchen namkhé naljor lasok rangshyin dzogpachenpö tsawa dang gyüpar chepé palgön rigdzin lama
Longchen Namkhai Naljor6 and all you other root and lineage masters, glorious vidyādhara gurus,
of the Natural Great Perfection,
yidam khandro gyatso
And oceans of yidam deities and ḍākinīs,
chösung damchen gyatsö tsok dang chepa nam kyis
Together with oceans of oath-bound Dharma protectors,
dengdir dorjé lobma nam la wangkur du sol
Come here, now, and bestow empowerment upon the vajra students!
jingyi lab tu sol
Inspire them with your blessings,
tokpa par du sol
Set their realization ablaze,
tulshyuk kyé du sol
Enhance their yogic practice,
jatsol lodé dzogpachenpö long du gongpé tsen sa zin té tsé chik lü chik la jalü powa chenpö
ku chok nyé né pal kuntuzangpö gopang la göpar dzé du sol
Lead them to the stronghold of the wisdom expanse of the Great Perfection, beyond actions, effort
and conceptual mind, so that they attain in one life and one body the supreme rainbow
body of great transference and reach the level of glorious Samantabhadra!
Recite this three times and transmit the ultimate lineage.
Everyone rests their minds in a state beyond reference.

Then, for the instructions on the samayas,
Explain the categories and have the students repeat the following:
tsawa ku sung tuk chok dang
All the supreme root samayas of body, speech and mind,
yenlak damtsik nyishu nga
The twenty-five branch samayas,
mé dang chikpu chalwa sog
And the Great Perfection samayas such as absence, oneness, and suffusion,
choga shyindu sungwar gyi
I pledge to maintain in the proper way.
Recite this. Then the students offer a maṇḍala out of gratitude.
The students pledge their service:
tsowö jitar ka tsalpa
Whatever the guru, chief of the maṇḍala, commands,
dedak tamché dak gi gyi
I shall carry out—each and every instruction.
Recite this three times and dedicate the merit.
The concluding activities are then done in the usual way.
Samaya!

This is all.

| Translated by Han Kop, 2021, for the Longchen Nyingtik Project, with reference to previous
versions by Adam Pearcey and Gyurme Avertin. With gratitude to Tulku Dawa Rinpoche for his
clarifications.

Source: 'Jigs med gling pa. "klong chen snying gi thig le las/ rtsa dbang rgyal thabs spyi blugs/
nang nus pa 'jug pa'i dbang ngo", in klong chen snying thig rtsa pod. 5 Vols. BDRC W1KG13585.
Bodhnath, Kathmandu and Bodhgaya, Bihar: Shechen Publications, 1994. Vol. 1: 89-94.

Version: 1.1-20210704
↑ In other words, a crystal.↑ Tib. riktsak (rig tsak)↑ I.e., the thirteenth of the sixteen stages
according to the Nyingma system of inner tantras. See https://www.rigpawiki.org/index.php?title=Sixteen_bhumis↑
I.e., Pema Tötreng or Padmasambhava.↑ I.e., Longchenpa↑ i.e.,
Jigme Lingpa